Grunt - Ugly But Beautiful


1.
What is Grunt and how can it help us?
Grunt is a Task Runner, written in Javascript.
It runs repetitive or automated tasks automatically
Lots of ways to use it
Lots more ways being built - JS is very easy-to-use

2.
Why do we use it, and why do you care?
Three reasons
  1) Helps us set up projects properly

3. Bitbucket
Version control is vital to keep our code safe and easy to work on.
Stores complete projects and saves updates
Last count 123 repos since June 2013 - that's a new one every two days!

3.
The second reason:
  2) Streamlines our development process

4. Autoprefixer
Two quick examples
When browsers have a new CSS feature and they're not 100% sure it'll be implemented everywhere, they browser prefix it.
e.g. CSS transitions, to do fancy hover states, you have to write -webkit, -moz at the front. Really difficult to remember, but Grunt automatically adds them

5. Live Reload
Grunt has a "watch" task that checks your code and, if there is a change, refreshes the page with the new styles.
Makes our development process quicker and makes debugging easier and gives us more time to do the clever, cool stuff.

5.
The third (and, for you, most important) reason
  3) Delivering perfect projects

6.
A few examples here.
Minification (CSS, JS and images)

7.
Stratus deployment
Adding/omitting code (Bugherd for stratus, Analytics and Linkstant for live)

8.
Live deployment
We deliver the best code we can to the client
Minification also obscures code - less interference!

9.
Why am I telling you this?
Give you confidence in our process

10.
Originally my second point was to avoid unnecessary questions, but actually they are vital question to our clients. Do we have Analytics - Is the code optimised - Are we confident in our code?

11.
Showing off a bit - we've worked hard to get this working and want to let you know that we are evolving as a team.

10.
Other stuff we're doing
If I see your eyes glazing over I won't mind.
Sass & Require - you can ignore them, but for those of you that are interested Sass is a CSS preprocessor, which allows us to write cleaner and better CSS, and Require makes our Javascript faster and less buggy
Node - server-side Javascript. Grunt and lots of other processes run using Node. We all have it installed on our computers and it has lots of helpful development tools.
Feedback session - we're planning on getting a representative from CS, SEO and EM together a couple of times a month to discuss a recently-gone-live project and get feedback. Hopefully this will inform future development.

11.
It's an evolving project and we're open to suggestions
Rolled out across most of the team, still getting to grips with how best to use it.
Implementing other offline ways to make our communication and delivery better.
Are there any things that we always forget?
Any processes you think could be added in?

12.
Don't expect you to be running Grunt tasks next week, but...
If clients ask what systems we have in place, you can say we have version contol (code security), a task runner and a build process (for quality control)
If you're woried about whether a certain process has happened, Grunt covers that - if you would rather we talked to tech contacts, we can!
Grunt remembers stuff so we don't have to.